Explain column-independent operations (#3225)
JuliaData/DataFrames.jl: docs/src/man/split_apply_combine.md

`pairs` function:

```jldoctest sac
julia> for (key, subdf) in pairs(iris_gdf)
           println("Number of data points for $(key.Species): $(nrow(subdf))")
       end
Number of data points for Iris-setosa: 50
Number of data points for Iris-versicolor: 50
Number of data points for Iris-virginica: 50
```

Note that although `GroupedDataFrame` is iterable and indexable it is not an
`AbstractVector`. For this reason currently it was decided that it does not
support `map` nor broadcasting (to allow for making a decision in the future
what result type they should produce). To apply a function to all groups of a
data frame and get a vector of results either use a comprehension or `collect`
`GroupedDataFrame` into a vector first. Here are examples of both approaches:

```jldoctest sac

> julia> [nrow(sdf) for sdf in iris_gdf]

Reviewer: > >    Still relevant.
>
>@nalimilan - what do you mean here? Could you please clarify?
>
>(GitHub does not show me what you refer to). You wanted me to put together all examples with printing >number of rows for all groups in one place and I did this.

Ah yes the GitHub UI is quite poor for that. It was https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/pull/3225/files/b4560f3c171048ff41107b7e78492c82a8be163b#r1027354724.

The example here would be better at the end of the block.

Author: @nalimilan - I have moved this example and added some more comments. I hope now it is better 😄.

 50
```

Since `GroupedDataFrame` is iterable, you can achieve the same result with a
comprehension:

```jldoctest sac
julia> [nrow(sdf) for sdf in iris_gdf]
3-element Vector{Int64}:
 50
 50
 50
```

> Note that using the split-apply-combine strategy with operation specification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that using the split-apply-combine strategy with the operation specification
```

syntax in `combine`, `select` or `transform` will usually be faster for large

> `GroupedDataFrame` object than iterating it, with the difference that they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`GroupedDataFrame` objects than iterating it, with the difference that they
```

> produce a data frame. For the above examples an operation corresponding
> to the examples above is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
produce a data frame. An operation corresponding to the example above is:
```

   5 │     2  missing      5
   6 │     3  missing      6
```

## Context dependent expressions

Operation specification language supports the following context dependent
operations:

* getting the number of rows (`nrow`);
* getting the proportion of rows (`proprow`);
* getting the group number (`groupindices`);
* getting a vector of group indices (`eachindex`).

These operations are context dependent, because they do not require input column
name in the operation specification syntax.

These four exceptions to the standard operation specification syntax were
introduced for user convenience as these operations are often needed in
practice.

Below each of them is explained by example.

First create a data frame we will work with:

```jldoctest sac
julia> df = DataFrame(customer_id=["a", "b", "b", "b", "c", "c"],
                      transaction_id=[12, 15, 19, 17, 13, 11],

>                       volume=[2, 3, 1, 4, 5, 9])

Author: The data would be too big and I was afraid that it would not be 100% clear what is going on. In this example all data is displayed fully in the output.

6×3 DataFrame
 Row │ customer_id  eachindex  customer_id_eachindex
     │ String       Int64      Int64
─────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
   1 │ a                    1                      1
   2 │ b                    1                      1
   3 │ b                    2                      2
   4 │ b                    3                      3
   5 │ c                    1                      1
   6 │ c                    2                      2
```

## Column-independent operations versus functions

When discussing column-independent operations it is important to remember
that operation specification syntax allows you to pass a function (without
source and target column names), in which case such a function gets passed a
`SubDataFrame` that represents a group in a `GroupedDataFrame`. Here is an
example comparing column-independent operation and a function:

```jldoctest sac
julia> combine(gdf, nrow, x -> nrow(x))
3×3 DataFrame
 Row │ customer_id  nrow   x1
     │ String       Int64  Int64
─────┼───────────────────────────
   1 │ a                1      1
   2 │ b                3      3
   3 │ c                2      2
```

> Notice that columns `:nrow` and `:x1` have an identical contents. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that columns `:nrow` and `:x1` have identical contents. This is
```

generating the `:nrow` column with number of rows per group. However, the
`x -> nrow(x)` anonymous function does exactly the same as it gets a
`SubDataFrame` as its argument and returns its number of rows (the `:x1` column
name is a default auto-generated column name in this case).

Passing a function taking a `SubDataFrame` is a flexible functionality allowing
you to perform complex operations on your data. However, you should bear in mind
two aspects:

* Using the full operation specification syntax (where source and target column
  names are passed) will lead to faster execution of your code (as the Julia
  compiler is able to better optimize execution of such operations) in
  comparison to just passing a function taking a `SubDataFrame`.
* Although writing `row`, `proprow`, `groupindices`, and `eachindex` looks like
  just passing a function they **do not** take a `SubDataFrame` as their
  argument. As we explained in this section, they are special column-independent
  operations that are exceptions to the standard operation specification syntax
  rules. They were added for user convenience (and at the same time they are

>   optimized to be fast).

Reviewer: This point is a bit weird given that the example above using `nrow` shows that the result is exactly the same. Maybe explain that it's the case for `nrow` and `eachindex` (though they are optimized) but not for `proprow` and `groupindices`?

Reviewer 2: I agree and this competition/interference was the most difficult part of learning column-independent expressions in DF.jl for me (so I'm happy to see it get an explanation in the docs!).

To that point, maybe a slight change in wording? Perhaps instead of:
> they **do not** take a `SubDataFrame` as their argument

It could be re-written as something like this, with emphasis on "routine case"?:
> they **do not** follow the routine case of a function taking a `SubDataFrame` as their argument. {Explain internal optimization in the case of `nrow` and `eachindex`}. {Explain that `proprow` and `groupindices` actually take different arguments}.

For what it's worth data.table also does [internal optimization of expressions which they call GForce](https://rdatatable.gitlab.io/data.table/reference/datatable-optimize.html) (including `.N`, although that's not a stand-alone function in data.table). I wonder if there's some good language in that vignette which can be borrowed for this.

Author: > This point is a bit weird given that the example above using `nrow` shows that the result is exactly the same.

The result above is not the same - it has a different column name. Actually the case that it would work is only for `nrow`. For `eachindex` it is also an error as for `proprow` and `groupindices`. I have added an example showing the difference for `eachindex`.

I have updated the description an examples. I hope they are clearer now.

Regarding GForce - this is an independent issue. We have GForce-like optimizations also in other places and introducing it would risk confusing them. I just removed the reference to optimizations (although they are made indeed).

   1 │ a                    1                      1
   2 │ b                    1                      1
   3 │ b                    2                      2
   4 │ b                    3                      3
   5 │ c                    1                      1
   6 │ c                    2                      2
```

## Column-independent operations versus functions

When discussing column-independent operations it is important to remember
that operation specification syntax allows you to pass a function (without
source and target column names), in which case such a function gets passed a
`SubDataFrame` that represents a group in a `GroupedDataFrame`. Here is an
example comparing a column-independent operation and a function:

```jldoctest sac
julia> combine(gdf, eachindex, sdf -> axes(sdf, 1))
6×3 DataFrame
 Row │ customer_id  eachindex  x1    
     │ String       Int64      Int64 
─────┼───────────────────────────────
   1 │ a                    1      1
   2 │ b                    1      1
   3 │ b                    2      2
   4 │ b                    3      3
   5 │ c                    1      1
   6 │ c                    2      2
```

> Notice that column independent operation `eachindex` produces the same result
> as using anonymous function `sdf -> axes(sdf, 1)` that takes a `SubDataFrame`
> as its first argument and returns indices along its first axes.
> Importantly without special definition of column-independent operation
> the `eachindex` function would fail when being passed as you can see here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the column independent operation `eachindex` produces the same result
as using the anonymous function `sdf -> axes(sdf, 1)` that takes a `SubDataFrame`
as its first argument and returns indices along its first axes.
Importantly if it wasn't defined as a column-independent operation
the `eachindex` function would fail when being passed as you can see here:
```

```jldoctest sac

> julia> combine(gdf, eachindex, sdf -> eachindex(sdf))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
julia> combine(gdf, sdf -> eachindex(sdf))
```

ERROR: MethodError: no method matching keys(::SubDataFrame{DataFrame, DataFrames.Index, Vector{Int64}})
```

> The reason for this error is that `eachindex` function does not allow passing a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason for this error is that the `eachindex` function does not allow passing a
```

`SubDataFrame` as its argument.

> The same situation is with `proprow` and `groupindices`. They would not work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same applies to `proprow` and `groupindices`: they would not work
```

with a `SubDataFrame` as stand-alone functions.

> A bit different case is with `nrow` column-independent operation. In this case
> the `nrow` function accepts `SubDataFrame` as an argument:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `nrow` column-independent operation is a different case, as
the `nrow` function accepts `SubDataFrame` as an argument:
```

```jldoctest sac
julia> combine(gdf, nrow, sdf -> nrow(sdf))
3×3 DataFrame
 Row │ customer_id  nrow   x1
     │ String       Int64  Int64
─────┼───────────────────────────
   1 │ a                1      1
   2 │ b                3      3
   3 │ c                2      2
```

Notice that columns `:nrow` and `:x1` have identical contents, but the
difference is that they do not have the same names. `nrow` is a
column-independent operation generating the `:nrow` column name by default with
number of rows per group. On the other hand, the `sdf -> nrow(sdf)` anonymous
function does gets a `SubDataFrame` as its argument and returns its number of

> rows. The `:x1` column name is a default auto-generated column name when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rows. The `:x1` column name is the default auto-generated column name when
```

processing anonymous functions.

Passing a function taking a `SubDataFrame` is a flexible functionality allowing
you to perform complex operations on your data. However, you should bear in mind
two aspects:

> * Using the full operation specification syntax (where source and target column
>   names are passed) will lead to faster execution of your code (as the Julia
>   compiler is able to better optimize execution of such operations) in
>   comparison to just passing a function taking a `SubDataFrame`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Using the full operation specification syntax (where source and target column
  names are passed) or column-independent operations will lead to faster
  execution of your code (as the Julia compiler is able to better optimize
  execution of such operations) in comparison to passing a function
  taking a `SubDataFrame`.
```

* Although writing `nrow`, `proprow`, `groupindices`, and `eachindex` looks
  like just passing a function they internally **do not** take a `SubDataFrame`
  as their argument. As we explained in this section, `proprow`,
  `groupindices`, and `eachindex` would not work with `SubDataFrame` as their

>   argument, and `nrow` would work, but would prouce a different column name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  argument, and `nrow` would work, but would produce a different column name.
```

   6 │ c                    2      2
```

> Notice that the column independent operation `eachindex` produces the same result

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the column-independent operation `eachindex` produces the same result
```
